[Music]
[Applause]
thanks so much I'm not gonna be Gregory
in a saxophone for sure for a bear with
me this might be nearly as no it won't
be remotely as interesting as good or
entertaining is there a real view this
might seem to you like a very odd
question because you know you might ask
how do we find the real you how do you
know what the real you is and so forth
but the idea that there must be a real
you surely that's obvious if there's
anything real in the world it's you well
I'm not quite sure at least we have to
understand a bit better what that means
now certainly I think that there are
lots of things in our culture around us
which sort of reinforced the idea that
for each one of us we have a kind of a
core an essence there is something about
what it means to be you which defines
you and it's kind of permanent and
unchanging the most kind of crude way in
which we have it are things like
horoscopes you know people are very
wedded to these actually you know people
put them on their Facebook profile as
are though they are meaningful you can
know your Chinese horoscope as well
there were also more kind of scientific
versions of this all sorts of ways of
profiling personality type such as the
myers-briggs test for example don't
you've done those a lot of companies use
these for recruitment you sit at ask a
load of question you answer a load of
questions and this is supposed to reveal
something about you or your core
personality and of course the popular
fascination with this is enormous in
magazines like this you'll see in the
bottom left corner they're advertised in
virtually every issue some kind of
personality thing and if you pick up one
of those magazines it's hard to resist
in it doing the test find what is your
learning style what is your loving style
all as you're working a style you know
are you this kind of person all that so
I think that we have a kind of common
sense idea that there is a kind of core
or essence of ourselves to be discovered
and that this is kind of a permanent
truth about ourselves something that's
the same throughout life
well that's the idea I want to challenge
and I have to say now I said a bit later
but I'm not challenging this just
because I'm weird the challenge actually
has a very very long and distinguished
history so look here's the common sense
idea there is you
you are the individuals you are and you
have this kind of core now in your life
what happens is that you of course
accumulate different experiences and so
forth so you you have memories and these
memories help to create what you are you
have desires maybe for a cookie maybe
for something that we don't want to talk
about a lemon o'clock in the morning in
the school you will have beliefs this is
a number play from someone in America I
don't know whether this number plate
which says Messiah one indicates that
the driver believes in the Messiah or
that they are the Messiah
either way they have beliefs about
messiahs
we have knowledge we have sensations and
experiences as well it's not just
intellectual things so this is kind of
the common sense model I think of what a
person is there is a a person who has
all the things that make up a life the
experiences but the suggestion I want to
put to you today is there is something
fundamentally wrong with this model and
I can show you what's wrong with 1-click
which is there isn't actually a you at
the heart of all these experiences right
strange thought well maybe not what is
there then well clearly there are
memories desires intentions sensations
and so forth but what happens is these
things exist and they're kind of all
integrated they overlap so they're
connected in various different ways
they're connected partly and perhaps
even mainly because they are belong to
one body in one brain but there's also a
narrative a story we tell about
ourselves the experiences we have when
we remember past things we do things
because of other things so what we
desire is partly result of what we
believe and what we remember is also
inform us what we know and so really
there are all these things like beliefs
desires sensations experiences they're
all related to each other and that just
is you okay it's a very sort of in some
ways it's a small difference from the
common sense understanding in some ways
it's a massive one is it shift between
thinking of yourself as a thing which
has all the experiences of life and
thinking of yourself as simple
that collection of all experiences in
life you are the sum of your parts
now those parts are also physical parts
of course brain bodies and legs and
things but they aren't so important
actually you know if you have a heart
transplant you're still the same person
you have a memory transplant are you the
same person you have a belief transplant
would you be the same person now this
idea that what we are the way to
understand ourselves is is not of some
permanent being which has experiences
but is kind of a collection of
experiences might strike you as kind of
weird but actually I don't think it
should be weird in a way it's common
sense because I just invite you to think
about by comparison well well actually
think about pretty much anything else in
the universe maybe apart from the very
most fundamental forces or powers let's
take something like water right now my
science isn't very good we might say
something like water has two parts
hydrogen one part oxygen right we all
know that no one thinks I hope no one in
this room thinks that what that means is
there is a thing called water and
attached to it are hydrogen and oxygen
atoms and that's what water is of course
we don't we understand very easily very
straightforwardly the water is nothing
more than the hydrogen and oxygen
molecules suitably arranged everything
else in the universe is the same there's
no mystery about my watch
for example the watch we say the watch
has a face and hands and a mechanism and
a battery but what we really mean is we
don't think there is a thing called the
watch to which we then attach all these
bits we understand very clearly that you
get the parts of the watch you put them
together and you create a watch now if
everything else in the universe is like
this why are we different why think of
ourselves as somehow not just being a
collection of all our parts but somehow
being a separate permanent entity which
has those parts now this view is not
particularly new actually has a quite a
long lineage you find it in Buddhism you
find it in 17th 18th century philosophy
going through to the common day people
are Locke and Hume but interestingly
it's also a view you're increasingly
being heard reinforced by neuroscience
and everything this is a Paul Brooks
he's a clinical neuropsychologist and he
says this we have a deep intuition that
there is a core an essence there and
it's hard to shake off probably
impossible to shake off I suspect but
it's true that neuroscience shows there
is no Center in the brain where things
do all come together so when you look at
the brain and you look at how the brain
makes possible a sense of self you find
that there isn't a central control spot
in the brain there is no kind of like
center where everything happens there
are lots of different processes in the
brain all of which operate in a way
quite independently but it's because of
the way that they relate that we get
this sense of self I call it the term I
use the term in the book is called the I
believe the ego trick but it's a trick
in the sense that not it's like a
mechanical trick it's it's not that we
don't exist it's just that the trick is
to make us feel that inside of us is
something more unified than is really
there now you might think this is a
worrying idea you might think that if
it's true that for each one of us there
is no abiding core of self no permanent
essence does that mean that really the
self is an illusion does it mean that we
really don't exist there is no real you
well a lot of people actually do use
this talk of illusion and so forth these
are three psychologists Thomas met
singer Bruce hood Susan Blackmore a lot
of these people do talk the language of
illusion the self is an illusion it's a
fiction but I don't think this is a very
helpful way of looking at it and go back
to the watch the watch isn't in an
illusion because there's nothing to the
watch other than the collection of its
parts in the same way we're not
illusions either the fact that we are in
there some ways just this very very
complex collection ordered collection of
things does not mean we're not real and
it can give a sort of a very sort of
rough metaphor for this this takes
something like a waterfall these are the
iguazu falls in argentina now if you
take something like this you can
appreciate the fact
in lots of ways there's nothing
permanent about this for one thing it's
always changing the waters are always
carving new channels with changes in
tides in the weather some things dry up
some things you know new things are
created of course the water that flows
through the waterfall is different at
every single instance but it doesn't
mean that the aggressive Falls are an
illusion doesn't mean it's not real what
it means is do we have to understand
what it is as something which has a
history has certain things that keep it
together but it's a process it's fluid
is forever changing now that I think is
a model for understanding ourselves then
I think it's a liberating model because
if you think that you have this fixed
permanent essence which is always the
same throughout your life no matter what
in a sense you're kind of trapped you
you have a kind of you're born with an
essence that's what you are until you
die maybe after if you believe in the
afterlife you maybe you continue but if
you think of yourself as being in a way
not a thing as such but a kind of a
process something that is changing then
I think that it's quite liberating
because unlike the waterfalls we
actually have the capacity to channel
the direction of our development for
ourselves to a certain degree now we've
got to be careful here right if you
watch The X Factor too much you might
buy into this idea that we can all be
whatever we want to be that's not true
I've heard some fantastic musicians this
morning and I am very confident that I
could no way be as good as them I could
practice hard and maybe be good but I
don't have that really natural ability
there were limits to what we can achieve
there are limits to what we can make of
ourselves but nevertheless we do have
this capacity to in a sense of shape
ourselves the true self as it were then
is not something that is just there for
you to discover you don't sort of look
into your soul and find your true self
what you are partly doing at least is
actually creating your true self and
this I think is very very significant
particularly there's kind of stage of
life you're at you'll be aware of the
fact how much have you changed over
recent years
if you have any videos of yourself three
or four years ago you probably feel
embarrassed because you don't recognize
yourself so I want to sort of get that
message over that what we need to do is
think about ourselves as things that we
can shape and channel and change this is
the Buddha again
well makers lead the water flexures Bend
the arrow carpenters Bend a log of wood
wise people fashioned themselves and
that's the idea I want to leave you with
that either your true self is not
something that you will have to go
searching for as a mystery and maybe
never ever find the extent you have a
true self it's something that you in
part discover but in part create and
that I think is a liberating and
exciting prospect thank you very much
[Applause]